# x86_64 overview

## Memory Segmentation

Memory segmentation is an approach to controlling code and data access
privileges. Segmentation operates on top of virtual memory and paging:
segments of virtual memory are defined in virtual address space, with
variable sizes and different attributes controlling access
restrictions and other features. Historically, segmentation fell out
of use in operating systems like Windows and Linux for x86, so x86_64
does away with segmentation and simply provides a flat virtual address
space (access control and other attributes are instead specified at
the page level), However, it is still necessary to understand the x86
segmentation model as it still necessary to populate segmentation
registers and data structures - it cannot be disabled.

### x86 Memory Segmentation

In x86 protected mode, segment information is stored in segment
*descriptors*. Segment descriptors are 8 bytes in length and hold
information about the (virtual) base address, the segment length,
privilege level and read/write permissions. These descriptors are
stored with descriptors of other types in *descriptor tables*, of
which there are several types:

- Global descriptor table (GDT), which holds descriptors accessible to
  all programs;
- Interrupt descriptor table (IDT), which holds interrupt gate
  descriptors specifying the instruction to jump to when handling a
  particular interrupt;
- Local descriptor tables (LDT), which hold descriptors typically for
  a single program (useful to segment different stacks for different
  threads).

Descriptors are used not only to specify information about segments,
but also in specifying interrupt handling and local descriptor table
structure amongst other things. The various types of descriptors are:

- User segment descriptors define segments for data and code. The
  descriptors contain the 32-bit virtual memory base address of the
  sector, the 20-bit segment size/limit (implying a max size of 1MB),
  and various options such as the privilege level (0 - 3). There are
  two descriptors of this type:

  - Code segment descriptors define segments for executable code. The
    processor enforces that such segments cannot be written to. The
    descriptor includes information on whether the segment is readable
    by software.

  - Data segment descriptors define segments for data, which are
    always readable but never executable. The descriptor includes
    information on whether the segment is writable. Stack segments are
    a special case of data segments and the descriptor includes the
    option of identifying a segment as such, in which case the
    interpretations of the base and limit are adjusted to reflect the
    fact that the stack grows downwards.

- System descriptors fall into two types:

  - System segment descriptors:

    - LDT descriptors are entries in the GDT which specify the memory
      location of an LDT.

    - TSS descriptors are used in the control of processor state
      information for tasks.

  - Gate descriptors, including but not limited to interrupt gate
    descriptors, hold information about control transfer during
    interrupt and task switches.

    - Interrupt gate descriptors contain the index of a code segment
      in the GDT and an effective address (segment offset) of the
      instruction of the interrupt routine's handler. Interrupt
      descriptors are held in the interrupt descriptor table, which is
      indexed by the interrupt vector (numeric code of the interrupt).

Various system registers hold pointers to the GDT, IDT and active LDT:

- The global descriptor table register is a 48-bit register holding
  the 32-bit virtual memory address of the start of the GDT and the
  16-bit limit (number of entries). The hardware asserts that indexes
  to this table beyond the specified limit raises an exception.

- The interrupt descriptor table register holds a reference to the IDT
  memory address and size in the same way as the GDT register.

- The local descriptor table register holds the active local
  descriptor table as a 16-bit selector into the GDT. The descriptor
  at this index (scaled by 8 bytes - the size of each descriptor) must
  be an LDT descriptor.

Further registers identify the code and various data segments in
active use, which are used in all memory accesses. These are:

- Code segment (CS)
- Data segment (DS)
- Stack segment (SS)
- Non-default data segments (ES, FS, GS)

Each of these registers holds a 16-bit selector into a descriptor
table, plus a bit indicating whether the GDT or the active LDT should
be used. Additionally, two bits in the code segment define the current
privilege level (CPL) of the processor.

As mentioned, in the case that a segment is not explicitly specified
(near pointers), memory accesses implicitly refer to active segments
identified in the above registers. In this case, the referenced memory
location is added to the base address of the relevant segment to
yield the virtual address (which is then translated into the physical
address by the paging mechanism). Different instructions refer to the
different registers - control transfers (e.g. jump instructions) use
CS, stack instructions use SS and most other instructions use DS.

## References

- [AMD64 Programmer's Guide (Volume 1)](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/24592.pdf)
- [AMD64 Programmer's Guide (Volume 2)](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/24593.pdf)
